WIKIPEDIA

The Free Encyclopedia

Leptis Magna

Coordinates: 32°3821"N 14°17'26"E

Leptis or Lepcis Magna, also known by other names in
antiquity, was a prominent city of the Carthaginian Empire and
Roman Libya at the mouth of the Wadi Lebda in the
Mediterranean.

Originally a 7th-century BC Phoenician foundation, it was
greatly expanded under Roman Emperor Septimius Severus
(: 193-211), who was born in the city. The 3rd Augustan
Legion was stationed here to defend the city against Berber
incursions. After the legion's dissolution under Gordian III in
238, the city was increasingly open to raids in the later part of
the 3rd century. Diocletian reinstated the city as provincial
capital, and it grew again in prosperity until it fell to the
Vandals in 439. It was reincorporated into the Eastern Empire
in 533 but continued to be plagued by Berber raids and never
recovered its former importance. It fell to the Muslim invasion
in g, 647 and was subsequently abandoned.

Its ruins are within present-day Khoms, Libya, 130 km (81 mi)
east of Tripoli. They are among the best-preserved Roman sites
in the Mediterranean.

Names

The Punic name of the settlement was written r.rq (Punic: P7£)
or LPQY @97£).HIRIE] This has been tentatively connected to
the Semitic root (present in Arabic) LrqQ, meaning "to build" or
"to piece together", presumably in reference to the construction
of the city. [4]

This name was hellenized as Léptis (Ancient Greek: Aémug),l5)
also known as Léptis Megdle (Aémug peydin, "Greater
Leptis") distinguishing it from the "Lesser Leptis" closer to
Carthage in modern-day Tunisia. It was also known by the
Greeks as Nedpolis (NedmoAig, "New Town"). The latinization
of these names was Lepcis or Leptis Magna ("Greater Leptis"),
which also appeared as the "Leptimagnese City" (Latin:
Leptimagnensis Civitas). The Latin demonym was "Leptitan”

Leptis Magna

Shown within Libya
Alternative name [epcis Magna,
Neapolis, Lpqy

Location Khoms, Libya
Region Tripolitania
Coordinates 32°38'21"N
14°17'26"E
Type Settlement
History
Founded 7th c. BC
Abandoned 7th c. AD
Periods Iron Age to
Byzantine
Cultures Carthaginian

Roman
(Leptitanus). It was also known as Ulpia Traiana as a Roman
colony. Its Italian name is Lepti Maggiore, and in Arabic it is

UNESCO World Heritage Site

named Labdah (833)).16171 Official name Archaeological Site
of Leptis Magna
History Type Cultural
Criteria i, ii, iii
Phoenicians Designated 1982 (6th session)
Reference no. 183 (https://whc.un
The Phoenician city was founded in the second half of the 7th esco.org/en/list/18
century BC. Little is known about Leptis during this time, but it 3)
appears to have been powerful enough to repel Dorieus's Region North Africa

attempt to establish a Greek colony nearby around
515 BC.2] Like most western Phoenician settlements, Lepts
became part of the Carthaginian Empire and fell under
Rome's control with Carthage's defeat in the Punic Wars.
Leptis remained highly independent for a period after about
111 BC.

Roman Republic

The Roman Republic sent some colonists together with a
small garrison in order to control the city. The city prospered
and was even allowed to coin its own money in silver and
bronze. Reflecting its blend of cultures, its coins bore Punic
inscriptions but images of Hercules and Dionysus.! Soon
Italian merchants settled in the city and started a profitable
commerce with the Libyan interior. [8] The city depended primarily on the fertility of its surrounding
farmland, where many olive-presses have been excavated. By 46 BC, its olive oil production was of such

Map of Leptis Magna

an extent that the city was able to provide three million pounds of oil annually to Julius Caesar as tax. [2]

Roman Empire

Kenneth D. Matthews, Jr. writes:[°]

During the reign of Augustus, Leptis Magna was classified as a civitas libera et immunis, or a
free community, over which the governor had an absolute minimum of control. As such Leptis
retain its two suphetes at the head of its government, with the mhzm, similar to the Roman
aediles, as minor magistrates. In addition there were such sacred officials as the “addir ’ararim
or praefectus sacrorum, the néquim elim, and probably a sacred college of fifteen members.

Leptis Magna remained as such until the reign of the Roman emperor Tiberius, when the city and the
surrounding area were formally incorporated into the empire as part of the province of Africa. It soon
became one of the leading cities of Roman Africa and a major trading post. The city grew rapidly under
Roman administration. During the reign of Nero, an amphitheater was constructed. The settlement was
elevated to municipium in AD 64 or 65 and to colonia under Trajan (J, 98-117)
Leptis achieved its greatest prominence beginning in AD 193, as
the hometown of emperor Septimius Severus. Septimius favored
his hometown above all other provincial cities, and the buildings
and wealth he lavished on it made Leptis Magna the third-most
important city in Africa, rivaling Carthage and Alexandria. In
AD 205, he and the imperial family visited the city and bestowed
great honors. Among the changes that Severus introduced were the
creation of a magnificent new forum and the rebuilding of the
docks. The natural harbor had a tendency to silt up, but the Severan
changes made this worse, and the eastern wharves are extremely
well preserved, since they were scarcely used.

Leptis overextended itself during this period. During the Crisis of
the 3rd Century, when trade declined precipitously, Leptis Magna's
importance also fell into a decline, and by the middle of the 4th
century, even before it was completely devastated by the 365
tsunami, large parts of the city had been abandoned. Ammianus
Marcellinus recounts that the crisis was worsened by a corrupt
Roman governor named Romanus, who demanded bribes to
protect the city during a major tribal raid. The ruined city could not
pay these and complained to the emperor Valentinian I. Romanus EE ri
then bribed people at court and arranged for the Leptan envoys to Arch of Septimius Severus
be punished "for bringing false accusations”. It enjoyed a minor

renaissance beginning in the reign of the emperor Theodosius I.

Vandal Kingdom

In 439, Leptis Magna and the rest of the cities of Tripolitania fell under the control of the Vandals when
their king, Gaiseric, captured Carthage from the Romans and made it his capital. Unfortunately for the
future of Leptis Magna, Gaiseric ordered the city's walls demolished so as to dissuade its people from
rebelling against Vandal rule. The people of Leptis and the Vandals both paid a heavy price for this in
AD 523 when a group of Berber raiders sacked the city.

Byzantine Empire

Belisarius, general of Emperor Justinian I, recaptured Leptis Magna in the name of the Roman Empire ten
years later, and in 533-4 it was re-incorporated into the empire. L.eptis became a provincial capital of the
Eastern Empire, but never recovered from the destruction wreaked upon it by the Berbers. In 544, under
the prefecture of Sergius, the city came under intensified attack of Berber tribes, and after some successes,
Sergius was reduced to retreating into the city, with the Leuathae tribal confederation camped outside the
gate demanding payments. Sergius admitted eighty deputies into the city to present their demands, but
when Sergius moved to leave the conference he was detained by the robe by one deputy and crowded by
others. This provoked an officer of the prefect's guard to kill the deputy laying hands on the prefect, which
resulted in a general massacre. The Berbers reacted with an all-out attack and Sergius was eventually
forced to abandon Leptis and retreat to Carthage.l'%

Islamic conquest
By the 6th century, the city was fully Christianized. During the decade 565-578 AD Christian
missionaries from Leptis Magna even began to move once more among the Berber tribes as far south as the
Fezzan in the Libyan desert and converted the Garamantes.'2] Numerous new churches were built in the
6th century, (131 hut the city continued to decline, and by the time of the Arab conquest around 647 the city
was mostly abandoned except for a Byzantine garrison force and a population of less than 1,000
inhabitants. By the 10th century, the city of Al-Khums had fully absorbed it. [14]

Excavation

Today, the site of Leptis Magna is the site of some of the most impressive ruins of the Roman period.

Part of an ancient temple was brought from Leptis Magna to the
British Museum in 1816 and installed at the Fort Belvedere royal
residence in England in 1826. It now lies in part of Windsor Great
Park.[15] The ruins are located between the south shore of Virginia
Water and Blacknest Road close to the junction with the A30
London Road and Wentworth Drive.

When Italians conquered Italian Libya in the early 20th century,
they dedicated huge efforts to the rediscovery of Leptis Magna. In
the early 1930s Italian archeological research was able to show Leptis Magna ruins, in the United
again the buried remains of nearly all the city.[16] A 4th to 3rd Kingdom, by the Virginia Water Lake
century BC necropolis was found under the Roman theatre.

In June 2005, it was revealed that archaeologists from the
University of Hamburg had been working along the coast of Libya
when they uncovered a 30 ft length of five colorful mosaics created
during the 1st or 2nd century. The mosaics show with exceptional
clarity depictions of a warrior in combat with a deer, four young
men wrestling a wild bull to the ground, and a gladiator resting in a
state of fatigue and staring at his slain opponent. The mosaics
decorated the walls of a cold plunge pool in a balneae within a “
Roman villa at Wadi Lebda in Leptis Magna. The gladiator mosaic The Roman theatre

is noted by scholars as one of the finest examples of

representational mosaic art ever seen—a "masterpiece comparable

in quality with the Alexander Mosaic in Pompeii." The mosaics were originally discovered in the year 2000

but were kept secret in order to avoid looting. They are currently on display in the Leptis Magna
[17]

Museum.

There were reports that Leptis Magna was used as a cover for tanks and military vehicles by pro-Gaddafi
forces during the First Libyan Civil War in 2011.1281 When asked about the possibility of conducting an air-
strike on the historic site, NATO refused to rule out the possibility of such an action saying that it had not
been able to confirm the rebels’ report that weapons were being hidden at the location.19] Shortly after the
war, Libyan archaeologist Hafed Walda reported that L.eptis Magna, along with nearby Rasaimergib Fort
and the western Tripolis of Sabratha, had "so far seen no visible loss" from either fighting on the ground or
bombings conducted by international forces. 20]

In the midst of the Second Libyan Civil War and the disappearance of governmental and international

support for the site, people living in the area organized to voluntarily protect and maintain Leptis

Magna.[21122]
Climate change

Since they are located on the coast, L.eptis Magna ruins are vulnerable to sea level rise. In 2022, the [IPCC
Sixth Assessment Report included them in the list of African cultural sites which would be threatened by
flooding and coastal erosion by the end of the century, but only if climate change followed RCP 8.5, which
is the scenario of high and continually increasing greenhouse gas emissions associated with the warming of
over 4 oc [23] and is no longer considered very likely. [24125] The other, more plausible scenarios result in
lower warming levels and consequently lower sea level rise: yet, sea levels would continue to increase for
about 10,000 years under all of them.28] Even if the warming is limited to 1.5 °C, global sea level rise is
still expected to exceed 2-3 m (7-10 ft) after 2000 years (and higher warming levels will see larger
increases by then), consequently exceeding 2100 levels of sea level rise under RCP 8.5 (~0.75 m (2 ft) with
a range of 0.5-1 m (2-3 ft)) well before the year 4000. Thus, it is a matter of time before the Leptis Magna
ruins are threatened by rising water levels, unless they can be protected by adaptation efforts such as sea
walls.[27]

Gallery

Some of Market place Amphitheater
Leptis Magna

yet to be

excavated

Arch of Septimius Severus ~~ Severan Basilica View on Leptis Magna
from the theater wall
